Cross-posting 'Log from Jenkins Jobs to GitHub Pull Requests as Checks' (#6889)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2023/11/2023-11-29-jenkins-to-github.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Log from Jenkins Jobs to GitHub Pull Requests as Checks"
tags:
- jenkins
- github
author: tslmy
description: "An overview about methods by which you can log stuff from a Jenkins Job to a GitHub PR as “Checks”."
note: "A guest post, originally posted at https://lmy.medium.com/log-from-jenkins-jobs-to-github-pull-requests-as-checks-fd8b57b91a1d[lmy.medium.com]."
---

You have a *GitHub repo* and a *Jenkins server*.

> The Jenkins has Jobs for running unit tests, computing code coverages, and executing static analyses.

Reviewer: "Job" is a common noun, not a proper noun, so there is no reason to capitalize it.

These are run on commits but are stored with the PRs.
With them, you can write long essays of messages to the "Checks" tab of a PR, but they do require authenticating as a GitHub App instead of a user, so it's more complicated to set up.
SonarCloud, a code analyzer, makes use of PR Checks via https://github.com/apps/sonarcloud[their namesake GitHub App].
If you look closer, their report is just Markdown:
image:/images/post-images/2023/11/29/20230902151934-Screenshot-of-a-SonarCloud-Code-Analysis-as-a-GitHub-PR-Check.png[Screenshot of a SonarCloud Code Analysis as a GitHub PR Check]

. *GitHub Actions* (GA).
GA is a different kind of CI system from Jenkins.
Since this article is about Jenkins only, GA is only mentioned here for the sake of completeness.
image:/images/post-images/2023/11/29/20230902152320-Screenshot-of-a-GitHub-Action-as-a-PR-Check.png[Screenshot of a GitHub Action as a PR Check]

== When the result is simple: Use commit statuses

The Jenkins jobs you want to trigger only runs for a couple of seconds.
Each only emits a simple result: pass or fail.
You don't need fancy reports, so *commit statuses* seem to be a suitable choice.

> You installed https://plugins.jenkins.io/github/[the GitHub plugin] to your Jenkins server and followed https://stackoverflow.com/a/51003334/1147061[this guide] to set it up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You installed https://plugins.jenkins.io/github/[the GitHub plugin] to your Jenkins server and followed link:https://stackoverflow.com/a/51003334/1147061[this guide] to set it up.
```
Adding link macro.

> You are able to emit simple one-liners as checks now, like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You are now able to emit simple one-liners as checks like this:
```
suggestion to adjust the syntax order of the sentence

image:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jenkinsci/github-coverage-reporter/readme/assets/coverage-success.png[]
_(https://github.com/jenkinsci/github-coverage-reporter-plugin[source] of screenshot; Apache 2.0 licensed)_

It met your immediate need, but it stills falls short in a number of ways:

> * The plugin publishes to PR only thrice: upon getting queued, upon the start, and upon completion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The plugin publishes to the PR only thrice: upon getting queued, upon the start, and upon completion.
```
adding `the` for readability

> Your job actually has *many time-consuming stages* (e.g., building a manifest, deploying to staging, and running tests), often packed in a single script, and you *want to be notified at each stage*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your job actually has *many* time-consuming stages, such as building a manifest, deploying to staging, and running tests. 
These stages are often packed in a single script and you *want to be notified at each stage*.
```
Suggestion to adjust sentence structure and add some syntax to convert to two sentences.

* The messages show up with *your GitHub profile image as the icon*, because Jenkins is using _your_ PAT!
You want to shy away from the spotlight, maybe because you don't want to be mistaken by your less-GitHub-savvy collaborators as a ruthless robot critiquing (and blocking) everybody's PRs.

That's when you start to look further.

== When the report is long: Use PR checks

Your job generates a long report at the end, but the Checks section can only accommodate a couple of words.

> You have been rendering the reports as HTML and attaching them with the Jenkins Builds themselves (perhaps with a nice https://palletsprojects.com/p/jinja/[Jinja2 template] and https://plugins.jenkins.io/htmlpublisher/[the HTML Publisher plugin]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You have been rendering the reports as HTML and attaching them to the Jenkins builds themselves (perhaps with a nice link:https://palletsprojects.com/p/jinja/[Jinja2 template] and link:https://plugins.jenkins.io/htmlpublisher/[the HTML Publisher plugin]).
```
suggestion to add link macro

> The commit statuses your job writes to PRs contained links to the Jenkins Builds themselves, so it's only two clicks away from an HTML report -- not bad.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The commit statuses your job writes to PRs contain links to the Jenkins builds themselves, so it's only two clicks away from an HTML report -- not bad.
```
Adjusting for current tense and builds is not a capitalized word.

> To prevent past HTML reports from saturating the disk, you configured the job to only keep the 20 most recent Builds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To prevent past HTML reports from saturating the disk, you configured the job to only keep the 20 most recent builds.
```
Builds does not need to be capitalized unless it is beginning a sentence.

> Then the team grew, and people started complaining that their reports getting purged before they could even take a look.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then the team grew and people started complaining that their reports are getting purged before they could even take a look.
```
Suggestion to remove puncutation and adjust grammar

You now have a *scalability* problem.

Let's move those reports away from Jenkins, and what's a better place than *the PRs themselves*?

> Following https://docs.cloudbees.com/docs/cloudbees-ci/latest/traditional-admin-guide/github-app-auth[this guide from CloudBees], you created a GitHub App, installed it onto your repo, generated a SSH private key for the App, and uploaded it to Jenkins credentials storage with "GitHub App" as the _Kind_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following link:https://docs.cloudbees.com/docs/cloudbees-ci/latest/traditional-admin-guide/github-app-auth[this guide from CloudBees], you created a GitHub App, installed it onto your repo, generated a SSH private key for the app, and uploaded it to Jenkins credentials storage with "GitHub App" as the _Kind_.
```
suggestion to add link macro

> (For the GitHub half of the journey, http://thecodebarbarian.com/building-a-github-app-with-node-js.html[this tutorial] has better screenshots.) Now your Jenkins job is _allowed_ to send PR Checks;
> how do we tell it _what_ to send?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(For the GitHub half of the journey, link:http://thecodebarbarian.com/building-a-github-app-with-node-js.html[this tutorial] has better screenshots.)
Now that your Jenkins job is _allowed_ to send PR Checks, how do we tell it _what_ to send?
```
suggestion to adjust lines, add link macro, and adjust syntax for grammar

  sh 'cargo test'
  publishChecks name: 'my-cool-check', status: 'IN_PROGRESS',
    title: 'Build, Test, and Publish',
    summary: 'Publishing...'
  sh 'cargo publish'
}
----

== To update the Check within a Step

*Case 2: If your Job is quite monolithic*, it can be awkward to split your self-contained script into multiple, just for the sake of separating them as Build Steps and inserting publishChecks in-between.
You'll have to directly interact with the GitHub API without the Jenkins layer in such cases.
In terms of the fancy plugins, this means you even don't have to use the https://github.com/jenkinsci/checks-api-plugin[Checks API Plugin].

For GitHub Apps, the authorization & authentication process can be quite involved:

* Back when you installed your GitHub App to your repo, you granted a set of permissions to your App.
This is called *authorization*, and exactly what your App can do on your repo can be retrieved from GitHub via an "Installation ID".
* When your script initializes, it needs to authenticate to GitHub as your App.
To do so, the script needs a private key of the App.
You can generate a private key from the App's settings page and use it forever.

> * FIf dealing with the raw GitHub API, the authentication is quite involved: You first generate a https://jwt.io/introduction[_JSON Web Token_ (JWT)] with the private key.

Reviewer: "FIf" looks like a spelling mistake. Did you mean to write "If"?

We'll use two: `GITHUB_PR_HEAD_SHA` and `GITHUB_REPO_SSH_URL`.
* For referencing from the PR Check to the Jenkins Build, we'll also need an env.
var.
set by vanilla Jenkins: `BUILD_URL`.
You can find a list of all Jenkins-set variables https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Building+a+software+project#Buildingasoftwareproject-belowJenkinsSetEnvironmentVariables[here].
* For authentication, we are on our own.
We can upload the App's private key to Jenkins credentials storage and wrap the `sh './run.py'` step with the closure `sshUserPrivateKey`.
For the App ID and the Installation ID, since they aren't necessarily secrets, we can afford to spell them out with an `environment` directive.
Combined, your Jenkinsfile might look like this:
+
[,groovy]
----
pipeline {
environment {
  GITHUB_APP_ID = '123'
  GITHUB_APP_INSTALLATION_ID = '456'
}
stages {
  stage('...') {
    steps {
      script {
        sshUserPrivateKey (
          credentialsId: "...", // ID from the Jenkins credentials storage.
          keyFileVariable: 'GITHUB_APP_PRIVATE_KEY_PATH') {
            sh './run.py'
----

Now, in your Python script, you can read the env.

> var.s during initalization:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
var.s during initialization:
```

Your script would use this IAT to call other endpoints, just like how you'd use a PAT when calling endpoints manually as yourself.

Luckily, many languages have libraries that handles the intermediate work for you.
Let's say your Jenkins file runs a Python script via (`sh './run.py'`).
We can use the https://github.com/PyGithub/PyGithub[PyGitHub] library to call GitHub APIs Pythonically.

In Python, the built-in https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.html[logging] library is the standard way to emit messages.
Your script would create a "logger" and attaches different "handlers" to it, each defining an output channel of your messages -- standard output, file on disk, remote service, etc.
Intuitively, we can write a handler for logging to GitHub Checks.

With the help of ChatGPT, I implemented one https://gist.github.com/tslmy/84f34a25babe045eb302ec72f2bf39eb[here].
You can see that the handler requires quite some parameters to initialize.
Where do you get them?

> * For locating the PR and the commit, the https://plugins.jenkins.io/github-pullrequest/[GitHub Integration Plugin] can help.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For locating the PR and the commit, the plugin:github-pullrequest[GitHub Integration plugin] can help.
```
Adding plugin macro for GitHub Integration plugin

It can trigger Jenkins jobs upon PR events, injecting https://github.com/KostyaSha/github-integration-plugin/blob/master/docs/Configuration.adoc#available-environment-variables[these environment variables] to each Build.
We'll use two: `GITHUB_PR_HEAD_SHA` and `GITHUB_REPO_SSH_URL`.

> * For referencing from the PR Check to the Jenkins Build, we'll also need an env.
> var.
> set by vanilla Jenkins: `BUILD_URL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For referencing from the PR Check to the Jenkins Build, we'll also need an environment variable set by vanilla Jenkins: `BUILD_URL`.
```
Suggestion to use "environment variable" or it could be replaced with the appropriate string/text that a user would see.

> You can find a list of all Jenkins-set variables https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Building+a+software+project#Buildingasoftwareproject-belowJenkinsSetEnvironmentVariables[here].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On link:https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Building+a+software+project#Buildingasoftwareproject-belowJenkinsSetEnvironmentVariables[this page], you can find a list of all Jenkins-set variables.
```
Suggestion to rearrange the link & syntax so that it is not using the [here] link text.

* For authentication, we are on our own.
We can upload the App's private key to Jenkins credentials storage and wrap the `sh './run.py'` step with the closure `sshUserPrivateKey`.
For the App ID and the Installation ID, since they aren't necessarily secrets, we can afford to spell them out with an `environment` directive.
Combined, your Jenkinsfile might look like this:
+
[,groovy]
----
pipeline {
environment {
  GITHUB_APP_ID = '123'
  GITHUB_APP_INSTALLATION_ID = '456'
}
stages {
  stage('...') {
    steps {
      script {
        sshUserPrivateKey (
          credentialsId: "...", // ID from the Jenkins credentials storage.
          keyFileVariable: 'GITHUB_APP_PRIVATE_KEY_PATH') {
            sh './run.py'
----

> Now, in your Python script, you can read the env.
> var.s during initialization:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, in your Python script, you can read the environment variables during initialization:
```
Suggestion to use environment variables so that the full stop is not configured incorrectly. Alternatively, the proper shorthand can be used instead.

[,python]
----
import logging
from GitHubCheckHandler import GitHubCheckHandler

logger = logging.getLogger('...')

handler = GitHubCheckHandler(
  private_key_path=str(os.getenv("GITHUB_APP_PRIVATE_KEY_PATH")),
  installation_id=int(str(os.getenv("GITHUB_APP_INSTALLATION_ID"))),
  github_app_id=int(str(os.getenv("GITHUB_APP_ID"))),
  owner_repo=str(os.getenv("GITHUB_REPO_SSH_URL"))
    .removeprefix("git@github.com:")
    .removesuffix(".git"),
  commit_sha=str(os.getenv("GITHUB_PR_HEAD_SHA")),
  details_url=str(os.getenv("BUILD_URL")),
)

logger.addHandler(handler)
----

Then, you should be able to see Python logs directly in the PR Checks sections.

> Note that the yellow light besides your Check will keep spinning as you send messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the yellow light besides your check will keep spinning as you send messages.
```
Check is not a proper noun here, so it should be lower case.

> To tell GitHub that this Check has finished, you should call the `+handler.conclude(...)+` method, so you should keep the handler object exposed to your main function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To tell GitHub that this check has finished, you should call the `+handler.conclude(...)+` method. 
Therefore, you should keep the handler object exposed to your main function.
```
small suggestion to adjust sentence structure/syntax

== Summary

In this guide, we've explored how to automate and enhance PR quality assurance by tightening the integration between Jenkins and GitHub, specifically by emitting richer logs back to the PRs in a more timely manner.

With the missing link of the feedback loop filled, we boost developers' productivity.
By freeing them from manually checking the results and attaching screenshots, we save developers' precious time and brain capacity, which can be devoted to more creative work.

In summary, automation not only boosts efficiency but also elevates the overall quality of your software development process.

> So, don't hesitate--start automating your PR quality assurance today and experience the benefits of a more streamlined and productive workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, don't hesitate!
Start automating your PR quality assurance today and experience the benefits of a more streamlined and productive workflow.
```
suggestion to adjust sentence structure/formatting

> Thank you for following along, and happy coding!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thank you for following along and happy coding!
```
Removing unnecessary comma
